So there's a new movie called Air. It's about a Nike marketing executive, Sonny Vakara,
played by Matt Damon, and how he pushed Nike to create an entire line of shoes around Michael
Jordan, the Air Jordans, in 1984. This isn't a biopic of an entrepreneur or an athlete or a company.
It might be the first biopic of a brand. Biopic. Biopic. Okay. Brands are something that I've always
been interested in both as someone who just wants to understand the world better, but also as a
comedy writer, because brands are extremely funny to me. Like somewhere in the world right now,
a conference room full of marketing executives is trying to figure out how to project an identity
and values for a product called like dumpy diapers. But as ridiculous as they are, brands have
infiltrated our culture so deeply that the highest level of achievement in our society is to completely
fuse with capitalism and become a living, breathing brand. To be Rihanna slash Fenty,
or Dr. Dre slash Beats, or Jordan Peterson slash Loneliness. And the original celebrity brand,
the first person that everyone wanted to be like, was Mike. Oh, Jordan. Michael Jordan.
And Air tells the story of how Michael Jordan became Air Jordan. But the real story of how
Nike created that brand and how they revolutionized the modern corporation is way more interesting
and less flattering to Nike and its CEO, Phil Knight, than the story this film tells. That story
was first told in a hugely influential book called No Logo. Through a combination of investigative
reporting and brilliant analysis, it explained exactly how Nike and other brands came to latch
onto our culture and consume it like a cool, refreshing Heineken, open your world.
No Logo made its author, Naomi Klein, an intellectual rock star at the age of 29,
one of the biggest rock bands in the world at the time, Radiohead, actually considered naming
one of their albums, No Logo. It's about the invasion of your ideas and your emotions and
your feelings. They ended up calling it Kid A instead, but it's hard to overstate how influential
this book was to an entire generation of people. That popularity was partly due to good timing.
Just days before the book was released on November 30th, 1999, a massive protest began at the World
Trade Organization Summit in Seattle called the Battle of Seattle. Tens of thousands of protesters
were bombarded with tear gas, pepper spray, and rubber bullets, and the city declared a state
of emergency. Frazier and Niles Crane were utterly aghast. Today, this kind of protest would barely
make the news, but at the time, it blew people's minds. They were like, protest? Why would anyone
protest? It's the 90s. Everything is great. Have you heard the New Hoodie and the Blowfish album?
It's fine. Most young people in the 90s had never even seen a protest in real life, and nobody
had seen a protest like this. People were rejecting an economic order, which, up until that point,
had been widely accepted as, much like Hoodie and the Blowfish, fine. So suddenly, everyone
wanted to understand where all this outrage was coming from, and no logo provided the answer.
I didn't read this book for the first time until 2016, and I reread it recently. And while the parts
documenting the anti-corporate resistance movement were interesting, I want to focus on Klein's
analyses of multinational corporations and their brands. Because the company she used as her main
case study to help readers understand the marketing first workers last business model that took over
in the 90s, and that led to the Battle of Seattle was Nike. So using Naomi Klein as my intellectual
GPS and no logo as one giant citation for this whole video, I'm going to talk about how brands
became so powerful, how Nike helped pioneer this expanded role that brands would play in our economy
and our culture, and why Air is the perfect title for this movie for reasons that have nothing to do
with basketball. So brands, as we know them now, didn't really show up until the late 19th century.
Back then, if you wanted some sugar or flour, you'd go to the local general store, tell the shopkeeper
what you needed, and he would scoop it out of barrels, hopefully not with his hands. But when
mass production started in the 1880s, companies had a problem. Their products were all really
similar to each other. So if they wanted to sell more, they had to stand out. And that's when
companies discovered the first rule of advertising. The more similar products are to each other,
the more important it is for you to fool people into thinking they're actually different. So along
with manufacturing products, companies started manufacturing brands so people could tell them
apart. So you had Heinz Ketchup and Hellman's mayonnaise and Grandpa McDougal's Soothing
now with extra opium. These brands allowed companies to cut the shopkeepers out of the
equation and communicate directly with a customer. But in the mid 1980s, some companies took this a
step further. They realized that people weren't really buying their product as much as they were
buying their brand. So why not take the product out of the equation completely and just sell the
brand? And the company that led the shift to this new type of corporation that outsourced the making
of its products and instead focused completely on marketing was Nike. In the time period when
air takes place in the mid 80s, Nike wasn't some scrappy startup. Its CEO, Phil Knight, was already
extremely rich. He started selling running shoes in the 60s and cashed in on the jogging craze in
the 70s. But by the mid 80s, everybody stopped jogging probably because their knees hurt and
the running shoe market dried up. Nike needed to reinvent itself. So Phil Knight decided that
instead of being a running shoe company, Nike would become a brand factory where shoes were
just the raw material for the real product, the brand. He said, there's no value in making
things anymore. The value is added by careful research by innovation and by marketing. But
how does that work? How do you create value from just pure marketing? What is marketing worth in
actual dollars? That was an open question until 1988. That year, Philip Morris bought craft for
$13 billion, six times more than the company was worth on paper, which means the word craft
was valued at over $10 billion. So just the synapses firing in millions of people's brains,
recognizing the word craft and having certain feelings about that word was worth over $10
billion, which was proof that this marketing first model worked. Ads were no longer just a way to
sell more stuff. They could increase the value of your company. The more you spent on ads,
the more your brand was worth. So Nike and other multinational corporations completely
reoriented themselves towards marketing. And that process involved three steps that had an
enormous impact on our economy and our culture and our politics in ways that are still felt to this
day. The first step was to close the American factories and outsource manufacturing to contractors
and subcontractors in the global south, whose only job was to make stuff as cheaply as possible.
That meant a boom in sweatshops. And we all know this part of the story. People living in low-income
countries around the world are paid starvation wages in horrible conditions to make clothing for
people living in richer countries who try not to think about it. In the early 90s, most people
were still genuinely ignorant about sweatshops, but that all changed in 1996. After years of
activists trying to raise awareness of child labor being used by American corporations overseas,
Life magazine published a report that featured this photo of a Pakistani boy sewing Nike soccer
balls. And everyone freaked out. Anti-sweatshop protests swept across college campuses, calling
out companies by name. The New York Times called it the biggest surge in campus activism in nearly
two decades. Phil Knight was suddenly a villain, and Michael Moore was showing up at his office,
offering him a free trip to Indonesia. But at the end of the day, Phil's friends circled the wagons.
Bill Clinton made him part of a toothless White House task force on sweatshops,
and academics like Jeffrey Sachs, famous economist and Bono Ride or Die,
argued that companies like Nike were basically engaged in a giant poverty reduction program.
He said,
My concern is not that there are too many sweatshops, but that there are too few.
Those are precisely the jobs that was stepping stones for Singapore and Hong Kong,
and those are the jobs that have to come to Africa to get them out of back-breaking rural
poverty. Yeah, it's not like companies want to abduct Africans and enslave them. They just
want to give Africans the opportunity to be slaves in the comfort of their own continent.
So Nike moved its operations from country to country, leaving a trail of sweat and union
crackdowns in its wake. While back in America, they moved on to step two of their new business
model. Once Nike and other multinationals laid off most of their workers, they could put all
that money they saved into perfecting their brands, which was a very different business.
These companies weren't making products anymore, they were making images, and they had to infuse
those images of cola or coffee or margarine, with some kind of meaning that their customers
would feel an emotional connection to. This made the job of marketers way more difficult.
Before the late 80s, if you wanted to sell something, you just had to come up with a catchy
jingle, maybe a cute cartoon character. But now these poor marketing executives were sent on a
quest to find their corporate soul, to find a deep spiritual meaning in like snack cakes.
And every corporation started sounding like it just got back from a backpacking trip to Nepal.
Nike didn't sell shoes anymore, it sold the idea of transcendence through sports. IBM didn't
sell computers, it sold business solutions. And Gillette was no longer just a razor,
it was an experience of confidence and power that you could hold in your actual hand.
But also just a f***ing razor. Understandably, this process of trying to find meaning in
meaninglessness broke the brains of marketing executives. They lost touch with reality completely
and got brand brain. Here's a quote from brand brain sufferer and former head of marketing at
Nike, Scott Bedbury. A great brand raises a bar. It adds a greater sense of purpose to the experience.
Whether it's the challenge to do your best in sports and fitness or the affirmation that the cup
of coffee you're drinking really matters. What does any of that mean? The cup of coffee you're
drinking will never, ever matter. Unless you're defusing a bomb and somehow the adrenaline just
isn't enough to keep you awake and you need that extra pick me up to keep going, maybe then,
maybe. You see other tragic examples of brand brain all the time, like that room full of staples
executives who stood and applauded for the big reveal of their company's new logo, which was
a staple. Or that Bank of America marketer who wrote and performed an earnest ode to a new credit
card to the tune of U2's one. I'll read some lyrics since the music might infringe on U2's copyright
and I'm already dangerously heavy on Bono in this video. And it's one bank, one card, one name
that's known all over the world, one spirit. We get to share it, leading us to higher standards.
Ooh. So one step two was complete and the company created a brand so powerful that just slapping it
onto something would infuse it with meaning. It was time to slap it on everything they could.
Remember from the craft example, ads aren't just about increasing sales anymore. They're an
investment. The more you advertise, the more your company is worth. So in the 90s, brands started
showing up in places that they never were before, like music festivals and stadiums. Banana stickers
were advertising movies. Colleges signed contracts with soda companies to put sponsored vending machines
on campus. And campus athletics departments all over the US signed sponsorship deals with Nike.
But it went way further and deeper. Brands became culture vampires, sucking the soul out of
everything that was good and cool to add value to themselves. They co-opted fashion, music and
nostalgia. They co-opted whole identities like feminist. And brands didn't just co-opt culture,
they co-opted counterculture. Sprite's obey your thirst slogan was a riff on anti-corporate graffiti.
More recently, we've seen brands trying to co-opt social justice movements, like when Kendall
Jenner solved police violence with high-fructose corn syrup. Now there was a huge backlash to that
Kendall Jenner ad, but the vast, vast majority of branding happens with little to no pushback.
Why is that? No logo suggested that it's partly due to the fact that corporate brands are filling a
social vacuum that they themselves helped create. Throughout the 80s and 90s, the pro-free market
political consensus hollowed out the public sphere. Jobs moved overseas, inequality widened,
and public schools deteriorated. So with fewer public funds for, say, after-school sports programs,
Nike could step in and sponsor its own programs and plaster its logo all over them.
And with a smaller tax base for, say, basic municipal services, KFC could literally fill
in potholes and label them refreshed by KFC. That actually happened, and the most offensive part
to me is the use of the word refreshed. KFC does not refresh. At best, it engorges. At worst,
equalize. But we haven't just lost public services over the last several decades. We've also lost
public spaces. And brands have tried to exploit our nostalgia and longing for those lost spaces.
Longtime Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz, whose name on screen here was spelled by a Starbucks barista,
said his company's customers are there for more than just the coffee.
It's the romance of the coffee experience, the feeling of warmth in community people get in
Starbucks stores. Now, it's true that people do have a genuine hunger for warmth and community,
but corporations like Starbucks are terrible at providing them because actual warm welcoming
community spaces don't charge you $10 to drink a small burnt coffee next to a tinny speaker
blasting Ed Sheeran. That Howard Schultz quote about recreating a feeling of community
reminded me of a mall in Los Angeles called the Americana at Brand. The whole place is a replica
of an old fashioned town square. Everything is spotless. There's even a chandelier for some
reason. And an old timey streetcar where a tour guide points out local mom and pop establishments
like the Samsung Galaxy Papa. Obviously, it's not a real town square. It's not a public space.
It's private property. And that's a crucial distinction because in a public space, you can
say or do anything within the confines of the law. But on private property, you can only say or do
what's permitted by its owner. You can't hold a climate change protest at Americana at Brand.
You can't hold a union rally inside of a Starbucks. You can't actually participate in
culture in these places. You can't talk back. It's a one way conversation. And now, of course,
our community spaces are online and so suffocated by brands that they can cut us out of the
conversation completely and just talk directly to each other. Like when Sunny D implied that it
wanted to unalive itself and other brands reached out to help. Just for your reference, I asked
chat GBT what you should do if a brand you love becomes suicidal. It suggested encouraging the
brand to seek help being a supportive listener. And most importantly, remembering that while you
may feel a strong connection to a brand, ultimately their well being is not your responsibility.
So simply dominating all cultural and public and online spaces was never enough for brands.
Remember, they're selling meaning. And what's the main competition if you're selling meaning?
Religion. And this is where Nike's boldest innovation happened because they decided to
compete directly with religion by creating a God. And they did it by following a very classic
paint by numbers mythical formula, a man who could fly. Early Air Jordan ads explicitly
tried to create this illusion that he could defy gravity. Air Jordans weren't just shoes. They
were a portal to a higher plane of existence. Nike's flagship store in midtown Manhattan
is right across the street from a cathedral, which seems appropriate because it feels like
a religious pilgrimage site. It's full of inspirational quotes and glass cases with
hunks of polyurethane encased inside like they're the bones of saints. And what's
interesting is that this store and probably all of the big brand flagship stores in midtown Manhattan
lose money. This is some of the most expensive storefront real estate on the planet. And these
stores don't move nearly enough merchandise to pay for it. But the point of these stores
isn't direct sales. They're meant to increase the value of the brand by making a statement about
how big and important it is. They imprint an experience on the people that visit and inspire
a devotion to the brand. Unfortunately for Nike, turning itself into a religion with Michael Jordan
as its God had a downside because this God had agents who negotiated non exclusivity. So when
Michael Jordan's fame and power outgrew Nike, it lost control of him. And if there was a distinct
moment that signaled this loss of control, it was the 1996 release of the movie Space Jam,
which was essentially a feature length ad for a super brand called Michael Jordan. The director
of Space Jam and part time Norwegian grave digger Joe Pidka has been very open about this. There's
nothing more than a long commercial. They paid for the movie three times with the licensing fees
before that we rolled an inch of film over 200 companies licensed Space Jam merch, which annoyed
Nike because they thought it would water down the Air Jordan brand. Nike didn't want to share the
spotlight. It wanted to be the star. And the amazing thing is brands seem to have learned
from that experience. And today they've co-opted the whole concept of movie stardom. The biggest
movie star in the world right now isn't an actor. It's a brand Marvel. Remember ads increase the
value of a brand and Marvel movies are advertisements for the Marvel brand. So even if a Marvel movie
breaks even if the exposure it gets increases the value of the Marvel brand, it's still profitable
to the company that owns Marvel, Disney. And similarly, even though the film Air wasn't
created by Nike, it will add value to the Nike brand because they perfected this magic trick
of conjuring value out of nothing. Nike makes most of its money out of air. I personally don't
think the transformation of Michael Jordan into a brand deserves to be celebrated as some great
act of ingenuity. And the whole idea of fetishizing a basic commodity is, to me, dumb. But as Naomi
Klein made clear at the end of No Logo, the criticisms of corporations like Nike were never
really about the brands. Brands are a symbol of the injustices of the global economy. That's what
anti-corporate protests were and continue to be about. The brands were only the music. The truth
was in the lyrics.